hey it's your friend mel and welcome to the mel robbins podcast i am so glad you're here because you're about to meet someone unlike any other guest who has ever been on the mel robbins podcast now i first discovered him on instagram a couple years ago he was standing there playing the ukulele totally relaxed smiling and singing this beautiful song he had the most extraordinary voice warm folksy wise kind gentle yet strong he had the most peaceful presence and just unbelievable energy flowing through the screen right at me through my phone my shoulders dropped i was immediately hooked an instant fan there was just something about him
so i started following him and then i learned more about his story i learned that he was born into a brutal civil war in liberia he narrowly escaped the life of a child soldier he was rescued and brought to the united states as a refugee and that as life changing as all of that was for him it didn't mean a happily ever after it meant a whole new set of challenges identity crisis isolation grief so many questions the biggest 1 being who am i and if you've ever felt lost you've probably asked yourself that question too and that's why the conversation you're about to hear is life changing if you're wondering well who is this guy mel his name is monrovia and he's not just on instagram and tik tiktok anymore he is playing on stages around the world which is why i'm extra thrilled that he made the time to get on a plane and be here in our boston studios for 1 reason to talk to you this episode is for anyone who has ever felt like an outsider or questioned if you belong or wondered if your story is worth telling by the time you're done listening you will know deep in your soul that you have an amazing part to play in this world and you are gonna feel
so reassured that you are already on your way to discovering who you are meant to truly be hey it's your friend mel and welcome to the mel robbins podcast i am on the edge of my seat i am so excited for our conversation today i'm excited that you're here it is always such an honor to spend this time together but today the fact that i get to meet somebody that i've admired at the same moment you get to meet them that is just a thrill and if you're new to the podcast i wanted to personally take a moment and welcome you to the mel robbins podcast family i'm
so glad that you're here with me right now and because you made the time to listen to this particular episode today here's what i know about you first of all i know that you value your time so it means a lot to me that you made the decision to hit play and you're gonna be so happy that you did because something magical is about to happen and if you're listening right now because someone shared this conversation with you it's because i was right something magical did happen in this episode and they wanted you to experience it too and
so does my incredible guest today monrovia monrovia is a phenomenon a 1 of a kind musician from tennessee who has carved out time from a busy touring schedule to be here for this special conversation you and i are gonna be swept away not only by his story but by his humility his compassion and the message that he is here to tell you today it's a message that's gonna leave you feeling loved empowered and clear mon's life story sounds like a movie and every bit of it is true mon grew up carrying a history and feelings that he couldn't fully explain until he found music and
now his music is finding people all over the world i mean just look at his tiktok his videos have 17,000,000 likes and a bunch of them they're from me and what he's creating doesn't just cross genres it crosses continents generations and life experiences mon blends his afro appalachian roots with raw personal storytelling a sound so distinct so grounding and folksy singer songwriter it earned him a spot on spotify's 20 24 juniper artists to watch list he
now reaches over 1,500,000 monthly listeners on the platform proof that his voice is resonating way beyond the stage at a monrovia concert that is something to behold he has sold out every headline show he's ever played he's taken the stage at bonnaroo austin city limits and the legendary newport folk festival this year this rising star is going global with a sold out european tour that he just completed and us appearances at major festivals including boston calling and a return to newport i mean this guy is a rising star but more importantly there is
so much wisdom not only in his music but in his life story and what he wants to share with you today that you can take whatever has happened to you in the past and make something beautiful out of it so please help me welcome monrovia to the mel robbins podcast monrovia i am so excited to meet you in person thank you for jumping on a plane thank you for being here congratulations on all your success i am so excited to talk to you
it's it's an it's a complete honor and yeah i'm really just yeah stoked to be to be in this place with you right now so thank you so much for giving me space to tell my story
i would love to start by having you speak to the person who is with us right now this is somebody who doesn't have a lot of time but they have hit play they're making the time to learn from your story to learn from your wisdom what might they experience that could be different about their life if they truly take to heart all of the wisdom and lessons that you're about to teach us from your own life journey
yeah i think something that i hope for just that 1 person is to know that life is is full of suffering but it doesn't take away from you belonging in it that you have such an amazing part to play in the scheme of things and so yeah i mean talking about my stories and the music all i do it for is for you to know that your time here is is meant
how do you cultivate that belief and i'm sure we're gonna get into it if you're in a place in your life where you are really suffering how do you get yourself to believe that you're meant to be here and that there's something bigger for you
i think it comes back to memory and if you can think of your life and the the things you've already come through and you're still standing you're still regardless if you're on the floor you're still here present with us and memory is an important part of the art of continuation knowing that you've come through things already and believing that you will again till you get to that place where maybe you're more you know fulfilled and strengthened is the ways i've kept myself going forward
for somebody who is just meeting you for the first time you know i i was introduced to you through a very very dear friend of mine i have been following you online for 18 months i'm so proud of you
thank you
your music does feel like waking up from a dream it immediately makes my shoulders drop i am so excited to see you exploding in terms of popularity and the recognition for your music but for the person who hasn't heard you sing has not heard your music does not know your story how would you describe the music that you create and the kind of artistry that you're putting into the world
the music i create i think for 1 is peaceful when you enter you know when that song comes on my hope for you is to to have you lose anxiety for you to be able to sink in and think about i think the importance of 1 yourself and i hope my music takes people into into that realm and that they can then i would say understand just how important they are
so that's that's that's kind of the main purpose of the music yeah
did you always know you wanted to be a musician
no no not at all yeah i think i had this gift of of making music but i was a very shy person i was really quiet growing up i mean i've come from a lot you know i've i've gone had gone through a lot of things at a young age already and so you know i i to simulate as well in america i think a lot of my life i was watchful trying to see what my place was and how to act as an african american in a white household in more of a middle class space private school so a lot of my life was watchful i didn't i wanted to play the part well and i think that was something that that that just became what i was early on i love that word watchful it's
so relatable because regardless of where you come from or who you are or what family you're in i think we've all had those experiences where we enter a space or we enter a group of people or we enter a chapter of our life yeah and we say i'm not sure i belong or i'm not sure what i'm supposed to do and this idea of stepping back and watching wow i i really get that about you and i can i can think of moments in my life where i felt that way too and i think it's something that we do when we also feel lost yeah and it's probably a part of how you figure out how to find your way and find yourself yeah and and it also protects you from at the time you know the time from saying things maybe that you shouldn't say or you know maybe social cues that you don't understand coming from different places or things like this
so it was definitely a protection you know mechanism for me as well
you know you mentioned that 1 of the things that you hope people feel is peace when they listen to your music yeah but 1 of the big themes that you have is you talk a lot about healing in fact the tour that you're on right now heal with others and i've also seen you use the quote healing out loud and your mission to me is clearly more than just making music and going on tour and that stuff is all incredible but can you talk a little bit more about why healing with others and this sense of creating and cultivating peace within yourself is such an important thing for you yeah it's important to me because i suffered a lot alone even being surrounded by a lot of people i had that feeling and that's not just you know known to me i see people like that all the time you work big jobs you're in a place where you're surrounding people but you still go home and you're like wow no 1 understands me or what i'm going through and music for me was that journal that outlet where i could be honest with my feelings and when i kind of started to do music a little bit more full time i saw that how this could relate to other people as well and
so you know i think the mission was birthed from 1 b seeing how successful it was on myself trying to form a community that way so it's been amazing just to see it see it do what it's done
you and i are about to get into your remarkable life story and you're young i mean like i'm i'm like a grandma compared to not
it's stop
so i'm
time is time what is time
what is time i but you know you literally when i think about the extraordinary number of experiences ranging from war to adoption to moving to another country to now finding yourself on stages around the world and being laser focused on this message of peace and healing what does it say to you that your music and your story is resonating with millions of people around the world oh i think it's a needed thing you know and i don't think enough people are sinking into that space where you give someone the space to really have quiet and an intimate time with themselves the world is fast moving it's it's loud and that's why you know being having the ukulele or we didn't even have drums for a while in a lot of my i'm a lot of my sets right people were still into just the sound and the experience and the words and the storytelling and it brought them back to situations and moments in their own life where they can really look at it clearly look at the mirror that 1 that we all try to run away from all the time and
so it says a lot to me it says that it's important the work i'm doing and i just hope to continue in it as best i can
well there's no doubt you're going to
well it's yeah it's it's hard it's not easy what's hard about it i think it's so much easier to pour and pour things that are detrimental like anger and selfishness and and and sink into that sink that into the earth instead like the outpouring of of love is hard and the outpouring of grace and forgiveness doesn't come easily to to us as humans and so i think for me personally as the artist it it it can weigh on you at times you know the the the giving of it if you don't have a place to be refilled and
so that's also why community is so important it goes back to that because to do the work that must be done for good you have to have also that mooring of people that you know you can go back and get replenished to go again so
you know when i first heard you somebody sent me your instagram account and i you know hit play on 1 of your songs and i'm like who is this guy is it like this is like and i and i hate to even be refer i'm like is this like kat stevens or is this yousef nador like what is happening here man that's sweet you have this incredible it's like you defy the category that people want to put you in you call yourself in terms of the music i've heard it called appalachia folk yeah afra appalachian what does that mean i mean i was i live in appalachia
so like that tail end down in tennessee and i'm from west africa liberia capital city monrovia and you know there's a lot of history in appalachia with you know the slaves that came over the irish the scots in the mountains you know writing these songs together the you know the banjo all these things mixing together in culture and i didn't even know a lot of this living in tennessee to be honest i learned this history as people started to say things like you like oh you're cats you're this i didn't know the the lore of the history of folk and anything like this but in the space of being in tennessee and seeing the correlation of how this is history it's yeah i don't know it it it's it's been a powerful thing to be to have it revealed to me this way because i wasn't trying to be you know i don't think anything with af afrappalachia or i just made music that i thought would help me on the journey of my life yeah well let's talk about the journey of your life because you were born in liberia yeah and in the midst of civil war and all of this violence mhmm your life changed forever when you were 7 years old yeah can you tell me what happened absolutely
so my mom you know she's a working woman and so she's had a couple kids along the way a lot of them passed away during the war so me and my brother and my brother timothy my sister who we call jacqueline because the other name is just super hard to say you know us 3 we lived and she you know she kept us and raised us as best she could she passed away in childbirth with our other brother and so it was just my grandmother you know taking care of us at this time and it was hard during the war there wasn't there was nothing you know and this missionary family had been working in monrovia was had been doing things in the community and 1 of my aunts decided to go and literally just bring me to them like there was no i mean it could have been my sister it could have my other brother that was chosen but they she picked me up and said you're gonna go live with this family and
so from that day on i lived with them yeah just in in liberia and we lived through the war before we met went back to the states for a little bit and i don't think i don't think when i became older i i realized how much it did to my mind i think like being pulled from your land the language similarity of people didn't have the words for it then i didn't speak i was i was quiet for a long time yeah my adopted family tells me this all the time they're like yeah you didn't say a word to us for very we thought something was like something was wrong with you i was like yeah probably there was something wrong with me i just i didn't know who you were you were these are these white people you know
so but yeah
did you have a sense when you said goodbye to your grandmother that
no i didn't know it was goodbye i don't think
have you seen your brothers and sisters since this
man such a tale to get to that but recently i did make contact with my sister after a long time of of really not paying attention to anything about it so it's been a very hard very hard thing to come to terms with
yeah would imagine
yeah
and i'm sure you'll continue to come to terms with it for your whole life i think that's how something that dramatic actually works
yeah you know it it it it it is something that i wasn't ready for most of my life to to look at as i lived the american experience i think it's so easy to feel ashamed of where you're from even if it's you had no part to play in it so i try to kinda just bury a lot of those things and and forget
and how is that working
you know you know the fast the fast is always in the undertow in the choices that you make and it it never left until i looked at it and was ready to to accept the truth
what do you remember about what your life was like before this happened like being a kid growing up in the middle of this really violent war in liberia because you know in case the person listening doesn't understand like 1 of the things that was happening is they were taking young boys like you and turning them into soldiers
yeah yeah my 2 brothers saturday and emmanuel they fought in the war you know ages 5 to 10 and i grew up in the i i i was born in the midst of the fighting already so all i would have known is chaos and violence but before that liberia was a very beautiful place i mean some of the friendliest people and there was a lot of good going on there was a dictator that came in bringing child soldiers from neighboring countries into liberia overthrowing the government and from there kind of descending the country into into chaos it destroyed everything i mean even to this day you know liberia is still trying to recover but there's no law you know and you're obeying 5 year olds with aks and rpgs you know like telling you get on the ground you know we'll take your sister or and you have to listen there it's actually kind of insane to wrap your head around that that's possible 1 of the things that you said that was i think very relatable is that this sense of feeling a deep sense of shame about either where you've come from or your past or what's happened even though you had no part to play mhmm and you are not responsible for what happened and yet you carry that with you what would you say to the person that's listening that either feels that same sense of shame about their past or about where they've come from or about where they are
now or somebody that they love is feeling that way like what's possible in terms of how to move through something like that
yeah no that's a that's a really good question i mean for me and i can only say it from my i think from my own my own standpoint but i would tell you that there's so much more i would say beyond beyond the past and you can't let the past hold you and take you out of the world that you are meant to be a part of and it did that to me for a very long time and i i sat and wallowed wilting just blaming myself for a lot of things and it's it's such an easy thing to do as as mel said but i hope you know the beauty of knowing that life is long and every step leads you somewhere beyond the things that wanna wanna capture you and take you back and the past is like this a lot to all of us and i would just i would just hope that you know that you always make it up your hills and around your corners because you just never know when good comes and but it takes continuing
so
continuing what does that word mean to you
that word to me i mean that's i i think that's my whole life has been that word actually it means finding another day you know for me there were so many times i wanted to quit and lay down and and say yeah yeah i'm i i can't i can't do this i can't overcome the survivor's guilt i can't overcome the the truth of you know the feelings i have with my you know my my mother and things like this and i would tell myself through the gray find another day another day to to quit and it helped it it it helped me to make it through each day i'd be like not today i'll find another day and though i continued again find another day i continued again until as choices come i started to make better ones i started to see how far i had gone from my suffering into the day into this beautiful experience of life into how where i am
now and it wouldn't have happened if i didn't keep finding another day to do it
i wanna make sure that the person listening really gets that because when you first said it i didn't quite get it and then i saw the genius in it and so let me try to unpack this and play this back to you to see if i'm interpreting this the right way okay
-yeah sure
-so when you said find another day right so nobody would blame you by the way if you're like this is all just too much i i i just can't handle this anymore -yeah the genius in what you did to coach yourself through that that i wanna make sure that the person listening really gets is when you said find another day if mel robbins said it it would have this like tinge of positivity you actually had this genius thread through it which nope nope i'm gonna find another day to quit meaning today is not the day i quit but i'm giving myself permission to quit on another day if i want to yeah and there's
so much truth and acknowledgement of how difficult the experience was and maybe some days still is to reconcile everything that's happened to you
it's true
and to give yourself permission to feel what you need to feel but when you say not today i'm gonna find another day to quit but today is not the day i quit
is not the day
right
yeah
absolutely there's something in the brutal honesty of that that i think makes it profoundly powerful
you know if you talk about adoption in itself a lot of families think this i'm not saying mine did but and they were an amazing family but i'm saying when i look at people that i know that are adopted that have been rescued from you know bad family or experiences around the world similar to mine you know a lot of these adopted families believe just that that oh you've been saved so you're good and it's just not the case for those that are adopted people you know there's there's
so much depth in coming from you know what is your your lineage or bloodline but being torn from that torn from a mother or a father it's it's something that you have to carry you carry through your entire life
i wanna be very clear to repeat back something that i heard which is i don't hear you blaming your parents that adopted you in fact you have talked about the fact that this was an incredible gift what i hear is you acknowledging the truth about how complicated an experience it can be for people who are being adopted because you have this huge range of emotions you feel grateful for the fact that somebody has taken you into their family but you also feel confusion confusion as to whether or not you were wanted by your family and if like you you were the only 1 adopted and you have siblings that are still somewhere else you wonder why was it you and then on top of that i would imagine that if you're coming from another country that adds a whole host of other feelings that you may have about whether or not you belong none of which is the fault of the adoptive parents and i'm sure if you're listening
now and you've either been adopted or you're an adoptive parent you know that this is true but perhaps you don't quite know how to create a space for all of those complicated feelings to be okay and to be talked about without somebody feeling bad i think that's what you're saying
there's so many feelings wrapped up in it 1 you watch your siblings you see where they get certain traits from and again i have characteristics of my thought film because i was young so i do have things characteristics of like my dad my adopted dad adopted mom but you watch and see you know the gait of their walk or a certain smile that comes across their face that looks like you know their mom or dad and you and you wonder you start to wonder like what and i have the song that i wrote about it called whose face am i and you start to wonder who whose face am i what is my history what is my story and i just think for anybody that adopts yes it's a beautiful experience and you're doing an amazing work because it's you're giving kids i think an opportunity to to live and also find themselves but i hope that as well you you never let them go through without telling them i think the truth of their their starting point like even if it's a hard story and there's something that will give them a lot of i think per identity in hearing where they've come from regardless of how hard it is is that something that was kept from you for a while i wouldn't say i don't know kept is interesting i i i don't know if it was kept really but we didn't really talk about it and
so when i tell you how i i reached my sister and i have now come back together i was in a place to ask a lot of different things about my story and honestly that's that's kind of healed me the most throughout my my entire time
what were some of the most surprising or reassuring things that you learned about your story that helped you heal
well i learned a lot about my mother and i think the root of my suffering which is an important piece is it always been around her and not knowing her and not knowing the feelings that maybe she had or how i you know if i had come from if i had come into this world based on love or based on other things and so it was tough because you know i found out some other things about just you know what she had to do during the war right to survive and some of those things were really heavy for me to hear but i also found out in the middle of that that she loved me very much and she you know decided to keep us you know and and i mean think about the sacrifice of a woman deciding to have a child in in war and like being like i i'm gonna try to take care of them in this experience it's just it it it's it made me feel very very loved can i ask you a really personal question and we can edit this out sure i'm just curious about this
so as part of your concern that you were conceived because of sexual violence that was happening during the war
yeah absolutely yeah and that actually that can be in the i don't that doesn't bother me 1 bit it's the truth of the matter and that was something as a kid that i was always afraid to to ask to to wonder i i didn't wanna wonder about that
and is that what happened
yeah yeah and so growing up i mean people will say many things and say you know you could you you know maybe i was a bastard and things like this like i thought about this at a young age like i was already already pretty in tune about just a lot of the world so i wondered a lot and yeah it made me very i felt very alone mhmm thinking about this and i remember speaking to my sister and i'll and i'll tell you the story i was driving with my manager 2 of my managers coming from a tour and i'm speaking to my sister listening i have my headphones in she's telling me this this story and
you know and i was like so tell me about my mom and she says oh her mom was you know she was so beautiful kind hilarious because she remembers she's older than me so she remembers a lot more and i was like well so what about my dad and she tells a story of how you know things went down and i remember i sat in the back and i and i just wept yeah i cried those tears that i had held in for a very long time when it came to that part of my my my story faced it you know accepted it yeah from violence still beautiful things can come and i think that is what brought me a lot of peace there the love afterwards i think met that she kept me met the most ever
so i mean i wouldn't be here without that
what's your mother's name
her name is maria yeah ma'am so
thank you for sharing that
absolutely yeah
where your manager's like dude what's going on back there the hell's going on
yeah
you just sold out that show why you bawling like a baby back there
they were man they look i remember they looked back they gave me peace though they looked back and and they just like got forward i don't think they do they just let me but they let me have that space to just pour out things that i needed to and they they didn't really ask it was awesome they just kinda let me do it and we went on it was there was no weirdness about it and that's that's a beautiful thing man crying is super important in life
well that's 1 of the most important things to point out that you gave yourself the space
yes yeah
you know i wanna take a quick beat real quick and give our sponsors a chance to share a few words and i also wanna give you a chance to share this life changing conversation there are people in your life that you're thinking about that i know you want them to experience the magic of what we're talking about everybody deserves to feel like they belong everybody needs to be reminded that they are here for a reason and so thank you for sharing this with people that you care about and don't you dare go anywhere because we are just getting started there is
so much more we're gonna talk about and monrovia and i are gonna be waiting for you after the short break so stay with us welcome back it's your buddy mel robbins and today you and i are hearing the unforgettable story and wisdom of monrovia who is a singer songwriter who is exploding in the music scene i'm a huge fan of his and today he is sharing lessons from his life and i'm
so excited that you're here i would love to have you since you seem to have made peace with the truth about how you were conceived and the circumstances that you were born into and you have really been able to tell a different story about the love that maria had in choosing to keep you and love you and cherish you and a lot of people don't do that for somebody that is listening to you and they're thinking well i i just am
so different from my family or i know exactly what you're talking about but i don't know how to reconcile the truth what would you recommend as something that they could do to start walking down that road of healing and that sense of coming to peace with the truth about just your life story
i think finding a place where you feel safe is the number 1 step into 1 possibly accepting the the truth or coming to terms with it and for me music was the safe space so i would tell that person if you have somewhere where the world is is quiet where you can look at it clearly and take the time give yourself that time because it wasn't something that i did when i was 7 8 9 10 11 12 i mean no this was years and i think accepting that when it comes it will come but you also have to create the spaces and that are not in the the loudness of the world for you to be able to sit still and and really look at the truth
so whatever that space is for them i think there is where acceptance will be found
do you remember the first time you felt safe
first time i felt safe i mean it's it's it's it's an interesting question because i mean i was safe but i remember still dreams followed me all i mean most of my life even till now i i have dreams of being chased by child soldiers or guns to my head and things like this so safety in my mind is something that i still search for but bodily safety yeah i was i mean i when i left liberia i i think that was when i was like okay yeah i don't think anything's really gonna happen to me here
well you got the question right because the question wasn't about whether or not you were safe
yeah
because i think there's a sense for all of us that we can busy ourselves
and we can know that we are okay
mhmm
but as we are out running or denying or not allowing ourselves to process what we need to process or to be honest about the things that we're struggling with we don't feel safe mhmm and i read that since you weren't thinking okay i'm just gonna write music about my pain and that's what i'm gonna do with my life and that's what like you were literally seeking space to be able to process the experiences of your life and i read that you started journaling and that that became the early entry point for you to start writing music yeah can you talk about like the power of journaling and how it helped you yeah i could never say i wouldn't say i was the best speaker in my family i i i had a hard time always trying to convey what i wanted to say to my parents or you know mainly my parents and i remember when i fell in love with just words when i started to write and it was just a place where it could be me it was just me and me that was the first safe space in in the journaling yeah and i didn't intend to really have that go into song to be honest but kind of as time went on i was able to turn a lot of my writings and things into you know melodic kind of flows and things like this and it became that way and
now going as i am you know older and things like that that's kind of how i write my lyrics is most of the time it starts with me thinking about things that i have a hard time saying or things i think about the world and i'm writing them down and then they come back to me weeks months years later into a song kind of like just yeah and that's the downloading from the source it doesn't i don't think about it but when it presents itself again and reappears these lyrics and then it it just turns into some something that can help another person so
you know 1 thing i wanna validate because i noticed you said i wasn't the best speaker and i think for me and the person that's with us right now we're like no you're a pretty good speaker actually i think the accurate thing and i'm just gonna say this and you tell me if this feels right to you
yeah
is you didn't feel safe saying what you needed to say
that is accurate
and it goes back to that sense of being a watcher in life
yes
that i think we've all had an experience where we're stepping back and we're in a mode of protecting and not wanting to hurt anybody not wanting to say the wrong thing and and i say that because you know i look at the various things that people write in about that listen from around the world and maybe as you're listening you said yourself i'm not really good at communicating i'm not really the best speaker true i would have you ask yourself is that it or are you more concerned about making sure everyone around you is not upset or confronted by what you actually are feeling and wanna say and
so i love this takeaway that journaling became a space that you created for yourself 1 of the things that i read that you said that i would love to dig into is i used to be in love with my suffering what does that mean
it became something i thought i deserved and so in that i accepted that exact thing that i'm meant to suffer a lot of people do that i for 1 easily did that when it when it came to anything that i that i went through i said you know i deserve this because i would look at my life and the choices i made and it all goes back to liberia for me because i wanted to forget them i wanted to to pay them no mind to not even respect you know the lives of the people lost there i just wanted to be american i wanted to i just wanted to go to college go to a place by sports have all these things in life and and when i was in college it came to a head my mind literally shattered i was i was
so depressed and and and had no no course and so i said you know what i'm just i'll just suffer like this is my penance because of all the things that i all the time i wasted in america not utilizing the gift of having an opportunity to do something i put everything of that on myself my mother dying i put that maybe if timothy or my sister jacqueline were here maybe 1 of them would have been a doctor to do something even more useful maybe 1 of them would have done something that where they could give
so much back to liberia or or whatever i didn't think of anything became american happy and did my thing and when it came and when i realized this when i was older looking back i said wow i wasted a lot of time doing absolutely nothing for what my story deserves
i know the person listening either knows somebody like this yeah or they are that person i used i deserve bad things
yeah that's what i thought
wow how did you turn this around talk to the person that's with us and just share a little bit with like what was the epiphany what like how did you turn this around and go wait a minute i don't have to do life this way
yeah i mean i was on lookout mountain georgia i was up there with some roommates and i had a i was doing drugs drinking like crazy couldn't pay my rent doing odd jobs and just yeah just not caring about anything everything that i had went to to alcohol or and i woke up 1 morning knowing that i wasn't gonna be able to make my rent anything like this i was borrowing money from all my dad's friends few like people that he'd know like i was i was texting them can i have somebody to do you know just pay my rent but it was always going back to other things mhmm and of course it got back to him 1 day and he he calls me up my father and he's you know son i i want you to you know come to and he's and he'd asked me times before and this brings me back to just speaking to that person there are people in your life that
have stayed whether you see it or not or want to see it there are those that have stayed and they're the ones that have been there for you in the dark night have whispered to you don't say that about yourself no no you don't deserve that and when you fall in love with your suffering is when you decide not to hear those people anymore and so for some reason i was at such a low point in my life i remember i said you know i have nothing else and so i took this hand that was extended for my father and i left tennessee i said dad i have nothing else i'll come i don't know what this is gonna do i don't i i i don't know
so i went to california and all i did was build this house with my father me and him because he was building the house in dana point california and some days he would leave and go to the church and i would just be home by myself for hours tearing down the house break you know taking out the nails breaking down walls and that alone time it's it's what healed me i saw the correlation of the destruction of this home to rebuild something new mhmm and i thought can i do the same thing to myself and it was just a powerful thing to me to be working with my to be working my hands on this this this house and making it beautiful at the same time working on inward things and
but i would say to the listener notice the hands that are extended toward towards you at all times and because they're the ones that are gonna help you come out of that place it's not i don't think it's something you can really do alone to be honest the need for each other is is the only way i think the world continues is to know that you we rely on each other for moments such as that
talk to me about the name because your name was john jay is that right
yeah it's my birth name
okay and so you changed your name though to monrovia which is the capital of liberia
yeah
when did that happen and why did you choose to do that
happened after i went to california yeah in the building process music finds me again because at this point before that i wasn't really doing much music i was just trying to live and overcome
mhmm
but when i got back to california started to really dive into these things i started to fall in love with music again and writing the truth and i remember they said if anything came from this it can't be about me anymore at all and i said i need to remember my people and where i'm from to keep me on course to keep me grounded and so monrovia was the choice name it's a reminder to me of of everything
how long ago did you do that
that would be 02/2019 wow
yeah i mean this is kind of amazing because we're talking just 6 years ago 5 years ago
yeah
you weren't even writing music then
no not before that i was not doing anything with music
that's kind of incredible this feels like a good moment to take a quick pause hear word from our sponsors and don't you dare go anywhere because i've got a bunch more questions i wanted to ask mon and he's also going to be singing after this short break so stay with us welcome back it's your buddy mel robbins today you and i are having an extraordinary conversation with monrovia and i cannot wait for you to sing a little bit later but first i wanted to ask you this question how have you processed the survivor guilt because you've talked about the fact that you were the 1 that was chosen it could have been your older sister or your brother and they might have made more of the opportunity and you've beaten yourself up about this how do you process the survivor guilt move from a place of of blame to a place of i think claiming this opportunity not that i have to owe anything to what i what i what i am doing and that and that wasn't easy but to understand that i get to instill good things to people i get to because of this rescue
bring more good into the world this way it's something i get to do it's not and i don't keep it as i think in the beginning of monrovia i looked at it as something of a penance to my people but as time has gone on i'm understanding more everything that happened to me i you know it's almost like antifragility i suppose where these things in life that happen to you you can choose to become stronger from them you know and so i think choosing that choosing to accept the gift that's what it was it was a gift and and it freed me when once i i could accept it to be like this is this is an experience that was chosen for me and i don't know i don't know if my sister had you know had has music or my or my brother right and i will do everything i can with the gifts given
now to shine light on my people the history of of of of them of you know black americans here of people in different countries that are struggling with different things i get to do that because of the gift that was given to me from that time
i am blown away by that reframe and i wanna make sure that we really highlight that because that was extraordinary people have survivor's guilt over lots of different things
yeah lots of different things yeah
yeah you can have survivor's guilt because you survived a car crash that a good friend didn't
mhmm you
can have survivor's guilt because your sibling was the person that was abused and you were not absolutely you can have survivor guilt for just endless reasons and you just said you were able to move it from blame like you make yourself wrong for being the 1 that it didn't happen to
mhmm
to claiming this and really seeing the fact that this is a gift and the way that you know that it's a gift goes back to something that you said you're meant to be here is there anything else that you would say to the person who is really just kinda struggling with the guilt you know that kind of undeserving thing which again sounds like i love my suffering so i'm just gonna you know there's periods of grief of course but then there comes that point where you're like okay yeah i think if you can change guilt to growth you know and notice that there's always an opportunity for that anywhere you look you don't have to you know and it's not a massive it's not changing overnight it's not it's the little tiny changes you can make mhmm of something whether it's you know i i drink this many whatever beers a day or i'm take you know maybe you you take 1 less 1 day growth happens and i think that overcomes a lot of guilt is is i think letting growth take its place and not sitting in guilt i think you can always grow from it and
so that's what i've done
so you've shared that music kinda was this space for you to heal and journaling was the space for you to when were you like you know what i think i'm gonna sing i think i'm gonna pick up a ukulele and i think i'm gonna start to write some songs like when was that moment that you're like
with the ukulele man that was a long way away way it's a long way i before that i was i mean i guess i take it back to high school i did play a little bit of guitar like a very small bit
k
but i wrote more for my friends
back
to junior senior year of high school so i already i already knew that that gift of writing was there but i never really wanted to be seen i'm not someone that likes to be in the front of people you're a watcher
i'm a watcher yeah or so you say
that's what i say yeah i guess that's but i went to college and i did 1 i did a musical event there called mountain affair at the school covenant college on lookout mountain tennessee and i ended up winning people's choice award at this school and still i was like nah i'm not i'm not this is not for me right and so after i go to california after my things i go to california i'm starting to become mon i pick up a ukulele because my parents got me this gift it wasn't i didn't want to play the ukulele i wanted a guitar k they're cheaper though the ukulele is cheaper and plus having musicians in my family if i buy you a guitar and you don't play it you're pissed yeah exactly if i spend $60 on a ukulele we're good yeah and there was an old guitar this is whatever but they gave me they gave you ukulele and i just started to write find simple chords and this is back in california and i started just to write some songs and this stuff wasn't going i wasn't making this broad to people uh-huh i just played it a little bit i moved back to tennessee mhmm and because of me being i'll i'll i'll be honest i think it was because of me being black i never really went into a singer songwriter you know that genre i decided to go okay for monrovia i'll take it into a more experimental way i'll just do like write i'll write over beats because you know this is what african american like they're not gonna smart music accept me into like the full that space there's not is that the kind of music you listen to no that's what i'm saying i i listened growing up my when my foster brothers came into the home they showed me more of the singer songwriter music uh-huh but i never thought i could do that just based on my skin and i didn't see anybody in my in that world that was doing that in my space and
so being mon i decided just to write over rap beats and do more of like a lyrical rap thing it's in dark consonant which is it's a lot of different genres and it wasn't sticking still so this is 2021 covid area
k
and 2021 comes to a close and '22 comes around and i'm like i got i found my ukulele again and i start to play and write songs on this ukulele 1 of my managers eric who's was with me from the beginning in the gutter he tells me dude you should go on tiktok you should go and just i love what you're doing with the ukulele everything else let's that that's not it let's you have these amazing songs you have these lyrics that really touch that touch me i think they'll touch other people as well and
so end of 22 december every day i just went i was like oh whatever i went on tiktok i just played my song only my original songs used the ukulele and people just started to to gather to stay so you know they'd be at work they'd have it on at work they'd be making coffee in the mornings and they would just have me on playing these songs and listening to these original songs and the community grew from there
who's the watcher now we all are we're watching you ron
yeah y'all watch me all and so from there that's when you know i think it it dawned on me that oh there are so many other people that feel though different experiences and different bringings ups and everything the emotions are what really connect all of us we all know sadness we all know pain you know love loss and so the music was hitting on those things and it brought so many different people into the space it was really beautiful
when did you have this epiphany this is what i wanna do for a living because you're kinda like dabbling in music because it's fun
yeah yeah
and it's something to do but then eric's your manager now but when he's like dude like you gotta do this yeah this was like a friend encouraging you oh yeah and it sounds more like you were resisting the call and resisting the thing that everybody else saw
it goes back to that to the doubt of everything that i don't deserve to be doing this you know could it possibly happen if i gave it my full efforts and i look back at my music and having a friend tell me believe in me more than i do is i would say is what put me on this journey and you need people in your life like that
and it goes back to what you said earlier when somebody extends a hand or somebody says you gotta do this thing like you really have something here like notice how quickly we swat the hand away or like nah
nah yeah
nah like imagine how much would change in your life if you trusted the people that were encouraging you yeah just imagine and i don't think you have to believe in how it's happening you gotta stay focused on the thing that you're doing that you're really enjoying doing
yeah
and it's clear that you're enjoying this
oh yeah
what would you say to the person who is listening and they're holding on to something a song a book a move they wanna make a name change creating the space to feel what they need to feel what do you wanna tell them about just making the move like to stop fighting against the pull of what i think we know deeply to be true but we are either scared of or actively resisting yeah i mean the time here is yours and regardless of anything you have your choices to make and you can either i think deny all the good that you can possibly have in this life deny it yourself or make the choices that lead you to you to you becoming everything that you doubted you just deserve to to to be happy like you really do no matter no matter what has happened you deserve to be happy you deserve to have to make the choices that lead you to where you wanna go you you know what's interesting is i think i just realized that there is
so much suffering
yeah
in denying what yourself of what you wanna do
yes
that is a form of loving your suffering yeah just making excuses and holding yourself back from just trying the thing or putting yourself out there or making the change
and you also could just do it because you yourself enjoy it a lot of time you put it on you put it on like if i put this out there what are people gonna think about it or what and at the end of the day gifts are meant to be given you're giving a gift you know what it is whether you're an artist you're author singer you were given a gift and it's meant to be given again and it's a blessing that you get to give it to someone else that in turn maybe then it brings out their gift because they see your gift shine your gift heal your gift brings something into their thought that they never thought about you know you mentioned that you when you first started screwing around with music you were laying down the beats and doing lyrics on top of it and it is like the opposite oh yeah of the kind
so when you look back though yeah and you know we all have those periods where we look back on what it looked like when we started and you've got that like your nose flared i'm like there's the cringe look on mon right now he doesn't look so peaceful right now
i just did that like not too long ago dude
so what do you wanna say to the person who literally is like i can't it's gotta be like they're afraid of that feeling
i think fear is fear is totally okay but don't let the fear stop you from from finding what's more i think you have to keep pouring keep trying the gift learning from it until and it it refines as you go and that's how it is you you you're not gonna become mozart or taylor swift overnight you know i'm sure there was different versions all along the way because she kept putting it out or they kept putting it out and that's what's happened on my journey is i kept putting out and trying this gift working at it and eventually it reveals where it should be and
now it is where it should be and i've and here we are
the art of continuing
the art of continuing yeah
and it's continuing to evolve
and it's continuing and it probably will continue to evolve yeah
you know 1 of the things that i have read is that you said that the question that haunted you the most for a while is who am i yeah how do you answer that question now
i would say i am john jay monrovia son of maria from liberia west africa yeah that's how i'd answer that
how does it feel to say that
it's beautiful yeah absolutely beautiful
and could you speak directly to the person listening who feels like i don't know who i am i don't know if i belong and they're starting to or wanting to or feel inspired to build their sense of identity to claim the gift of it
yeah if you stop now you'll never know the groups of people that are waiting to bring you into that fold that or you know the lives that you're going to impact in this life on this journey if you had no 1 tell you this i'm gonna repeat it again but you're meant to be here and it starts with you believing that every day and then the world opens up and different things start to take form and you're led to a place of belonging because you didn't stop believing that you were meant to be and i think the belief portion is is is the most important aspect and
so i believe that you're meant to be here and i hope you continue and that's i wish people said that every day to each other best friends lovers everybody you need to it's a it's a it needs to be a reminder it's so easy to forget because of all the different hardships that life brings at you
so if the person listening takes just 1 thing from all of the wisdom all of the lessons that you have distilled down as we've talked about your life we've talked about the things that you're doing with your music what would you hope that 1 takeaway would be
that your life is a gift and for you to live in that freedom with your choices and and and in that just all you know not be afraid to pour all the love you can into your into the experience that you have regardless of the hurt and pain that may come because of the giving of the because of the giving of it yeah pour all the love you can into your into this life that you have because it's yours do you have a song with that title oh no i don't i should i think you should i think you should and also you have your and i think about something because you just brought up a song a song but those who are you know for my friends who are in that place of suffering or like we talked about earlier falling in love with that suffering the song crooked the road it it used to be called crooked the road and the 1 driving that's what i called it because for a long time i i blamed the road and we all do that at some point we we we find excuses to go it's because of how i was born or and again these things still hold weight but the 1 driving you you are the 1 that has autonomy you can always choose a different path a different way and sometimes you have to look at yourself on the road on the journey and realize i can take that other turn my bandmate sam he had this first hook to the song just if you're leaving know i'll stay behind the telephone line and that's what and he brought that to the studio with us and we were in chicago and we started talking about you know where this song could go we loved the hook the the chorus was just
so beautiful that line of staying by beside someone through everything mhmm the song really is about leaving your suffering because i i write the song about the place i'm at on lookout mountain where i'm not noticing anybody or the hands and that song says that if if i grab it know that i care because darkness doesn't look on look good on you another thing we do is we don't want people to help because we we fear our darkness going to them them being engulfed by how much we we are mhmm and so we push them away mhmm and
so crook of the road is is is about that is about accepting help and the person standing by the telephone line are the people that we exactly talked about earlier that that want to see you better that are that are the helpers look to the helpers we know this
mister rogers
yeah
you know i know you're in boston not only for the mel robbins podcast but because you are 1 of the headliners at boston calling massive concert this weekend
can't wait
which i know means you also have your ukulele
i do yes
would you play that song for us
yeah absolutely yeah gladly
let's get the ukulele let's do it
sounds good
you know as soon as you got up to go get your ukulele the door to the studio opened everybody that's in the studio today came running in here we now have an audience i am so excited i have loved being with you i'm so excited to hear you play live and i'm so proud of you
thank you it means a lot
i don't know why i'm gonna cry but i'm so proud of you
it means a lot thank you
i feel like i'm getting my own private tour experience right here but i just wanna say you are on tour selling out all over the place and i know big things are happening and something i have a feeling big is gonna be happening this fall we're gonna be on the lookout because anywhere you are monrovia is a place for gathering for us all
thank you wow thank you so much that means a that means yeah more than you know this song is called crooked the road and it's about leaving your suffering behind and noticing those that wanna help
crooked the road and 1 driving 25 years i know you've been unraveling tell me why did you run run past the dogs and the horses
now you find yourself here pass the due's and don't serve your choices but if you're leavin' no i'll stay beside that telephone line and tomorrow we might steal the sun from underneath our eyes
tennis course when now it's yours late night releasing sacred floors got me believing a little more that this pain will run its course in the morning i saw you there holding out your hand if i grab it know that i care because darkness don't look good but if you're leavin' no i'll stay beside that telephone
line
and tomorrow we might steal the sun from underneath our eyes day breaks tomorrow but i still feel the edge of this cold night but next to you i lay softly on this hard ground
but next to you i lay softly on this hard ground
thank you so much yeah that's it
wow thank you
how did it feel to play that like what's that like for you especially after sharing so much about your life and the meaning behind that song
it's nice after those conversations because it just makes the it keeps the stories you know i think meaningful to me because over time i was always worrying about i just don't want any of the songs and lyrics to never mean what they were to me when i wrote the song because you can play them so much shows you can you get into a rhythm of just saying the same things or whatever and so that song means a lot to me takes me right back and thank you so much for letting me
play it thank you thank you for everything thank you for being here i'm so proud of you congratulations on all of your success i think you are at the very very very beginning of a massive as you call it art of continuing and a beautiful career and a huge difference that you're gonna make and i am just grateful that you accepted the gift of your life and that you're now sharing it with us thank you
thank you
and i also wanna thank you thank you for taking the time to listen to this to watch this to share this with people that you care about and i wanted to be sure to tell you in case no 1 else does that i love you and i believe in you and i believe in your ability to create a better life and there is no doubt in my mind that if you listen closely and truly take to heart everything that monrovia shared with you today that you are meant to be here that there is a huge possibility for your life just keep on continuing on and you will figure out what that possibility is that is meant for you i truly believe that alrighty i'll be waiting for you in the very
next episode i'll welcome you in the moment you hit play i'll see you there have fun oh we're gonna have a lot of fun
yeah this is awesome
let him say whatever he wants to say okay thank you do you prefer mon monrovia what do you prefer
yeah you can call me mon
you and i are gonna be swept away not only by his story but by his humility his compassion and the and the message
oh i went back to my side oh you
can do whatever you can
i can't i mean did
i get the tour of the right did i call it the right way
you did that was poetry that was beautiful thank you guys wow thank you so much if you lost i hope i come back
sometime you'll come back
to visit y'all yeah
okay that's a wrap great job and great job this week oh and 1 more thing and no this is not a blooper this is the legal language you know what the lawyers write and what i need to read to you this podcast is presented solely for educational and entertainment purposes i'm just your friend i am not a licensed therapist and this podcast is not intended as a substitute for the advice of a physician professional coach psychotherapist or other qualified professional got it good i'll see you in the
next episode stitcher